---
layout: post
title: "MaCurdy 1981"
tags: "Labour"
---

<a href="https://github.com/chiangnicholas/chiangnicholas.github.io/blob/main/_posts/2024-11-21-MaCurdy-1981.md">View as markdown</a>
<a id="post-top"></a>

These are my notes and summary of MaCurdy (1981 JPE).

# The life-cycle model

Workers determine their labour supply in a life-cycle setting. Accounting for this allows us to separate factors determining a consumer's dynamic behaviour from factors determining differences in consumption and labour supply across consumers.

Consider a model where the consumer chooses consumption and hours of leisure at each age to maximise a lifetime preference that is time-separable, subject to a wealth constraint.

The consumer's utility function is
```math
\displaylines{
    U(C(t),L(t))}
```

The consumer starts life with assets $A(0)$. 

At each age $t$, the consumer faces an exogenous real wage equal to $W(t)$.

The consumer can freely borrow and lend at a real rate of interest $r$, and his rate of time preference is $\rho$. The consumer lives for $T+1$ periods, with $\tau$ being the total number of hours in each period.

The consumer's problem is
```math
    \max_{C(t),L(t)} \{ \sum^T_{t=0} \frac{1}{(1+\rho)^t}U(C(t),L(t))\} 
```
subject to 
```math
    A(0) + \sum^T_{t=0}\frac{1}{(1+r)^t}N(t)W(t) = \sum^T_{t=0}\frac{1}{(1+r)^t}C(t)
```
where $N(t) = \tau - L(t)$ is hours of work at age $t$.

The Lagrangian is:
```math
    \mathcal{L} = \sum^T_{t=0} \frac{1}{(1+\rho)^t}U(C(t),L(t)) - \lambda [A(0) + \sum^T_{t=0}\frac{1}{(1+r)^t}N(t)W(t) - \sum^T_{t=0}\frac{1}{(1+r)^t}C(t)]
```
The FOCs with respect to $C(t)$ and $L(t)$ are:
```math
\displaylines{
    U_1(C(t),L(t)) &= (\frac{1+\rho}{1+\beta})^t \lambda, \qquad t = 0,...,T \\
    U_2(C(t),L(t)) &\geq (\frac{1+\rho}{1+\beta})^t \lambda W(t), \qquad t = 0,...,T
}
```
Using the definition of labour supply, we have:
```math
\displaylines{C(t) &= C((\frac{1+\rho}{1+r})^t\lambda), W(t)), \qquad t = 0,...,T\\
    N(t) &= N((\frac{1+\rho}{1+r})^t\lambda), W(t)), \qquad t = 0,...,T}
```
where the functions $C(\cdot)$ and $N(\cdot)$ depend only on the functional form of $U(\cdot)$.

We substitute these into the budget constraint to get
```math
A(0) = \sum^T_{t=0}\frac{1}{(1+r)^t}[C((\frac{1+\rho}{1+r})^t\lambda, W(t)] - W(t)N((\frac{1+\rho}{1+r})^t\lambda, W(t))]
```
Which implicitly determines the optimal value of $\lambda$. McCurdy (1981) calls this ``an extension of Friedman's (1957) permanent income theory to a situation in which the relative price of consumption and leisure varies over the life cycle".

\section{The empirical model}

Assume that the utility function for consumer $i$ at time $t$ is
```math 
U_i[C_i(t),L_i(t)] Y_{1i}[C_i(t)]^{\omega_1} - Y_{2i}(t)[N_i(t)]^{\omega_2}
```
where $0 < \omega_1 < 1$, $\omega_2 > 1$ are time-invariant parameters common across parameters, and $Y_{1i}(t),Y_{2i}(t)$ are age-specific tastes.

The implied $\lambda$-constant labour supply function is
```math 
\ln N_i(t) = \frac{1}{\omega_2 - 1}\{\ln \lambda_i - \ln Y_{2i}(t) - \ln \omega_2 + \ln[R(t)(1+\rho)^t] + \ln W_i(t)\}
```

Assume that tastes for work are randomly distributed according to 
```math 
\ln Y_{2i}(t) = \sigma_i - u^*_i(t)
```
where $u_i(t)$ is a time-varying error term with zero mean, and $\sigma_i$ is a permanent component. Then, we can write the labour supply function as
```math
\ln N_i(t) = F_i + \delta \sum^t_{k=0}[\rho - r(k)] + \delta \ln W_i(t) + u_i(t)
```
where
```math
\displaylines{&F_i = [\frac{1}{\omega_2 - 1}](\ln \lambda_i - \sigma_i - \ln \omega_2),\\
    &\delta = \frac{1}{\omega_2 - 1},\\
    &u_i(t) = \delta u^*_i(t),\\
    &r(0) = \rho,\\
    &\ln[1+r(t)] \approx r(t),\\
    &\ln(1+\rho) \approx \rho}
```

If we assume that $r(t) = r$, then the labour supply function simplifies to **Eq 1**:
```math
\displaylines{\ln N_i(t) = F_i + \delta(\rho - r) + \delta \ln W_i(t) + u_i(t) \tag{Eq 1}}
```
where the intercept term $F_i$ represents a time-invariant component unique to individual $i$. We treat this as a fixed effect.

Note that estimating (Eq 1) only requires variables observed within the sample period, and regressing current hours of work on individual-specific intercepts and current wage rates produces a full set of parameter estimates. 

In other words, we can estimate parameters needed to characterise dynamic behavior without introducing any assumptions regarding a worker's future plans; an individual constant term for each worker accounts for a worker's future plans in a parametrically simple way.
